TITLE: Novel Drivers of Virulence in Clostridioides difficile Identified via Context-Specific Metabolic Network Analysis 

ABSTRCT: The pathogen Clostridioides difficile causes toxin-mediated diarrhea and is the leading cause of hospital-acquired infection in the United States. Due to growing antibiotic resistance and recurrent infection, targeting C. difficile metabolism presents a new approach to combat this infection. Genome-scale metabolic network recon- structions (GENREs) have been used to identify therapeutic targets and uncover prop- erties that determine cellular behaviors. Thus, we constructed C. difficile GENREs for a hypervirulent isolate (strain [str.] R20291) and a historic strain (str. 630), validating both with in vitro and in vivo data sets. Growth simulations revealed significant corre- lations with measured carbon source usage (positive predictive value [PPV] $ 92.7%), and single-gene deletion analysis showed .89.0% accuracy. Next, we utilized each GENRE to identify metabolic drivers of both sporulation and biofilm formation. Through contextualization of each model using transcriptomes generated from in vitro and infection conditions, we discovered reliance on the pentose phosphate pathway as well as increased usage of cytidine and N-acetylneuraminate when virulence expres- sion is reduced, which was subsequently supported experimentally. Our results high- light the ability of GENREs to identify novel metabolite signals in higher-order pheno- types like bacterial pathogenesis. 

IMPORTANCE Clostridioides difficile has become the leading single cause of hospital- acquired infections. Numerous studies have demonstrated the importance of specific metabolic pathways in aspects of C. difficile pathophysiology, from initial colonization to regulation of virulence factors. In the past, genome-scale metabolic network reconstruction (GENRE) analysis of bacteria has enabled systematic investigation of the genetic and metabolic properties that contribute to downstream virulence phe- notypes. With this in mind, we generated and extensively curated C. difficile GENREs for both a well-studied laboratory strain (str. 630) and a more recently characterized hypervirulent isolate (str. R20291). In silico validation of both GENREs revealed high degrees of agreement with experimental gene essentiality and carbon source utiliza- tion data sets. Subsequent exploration of context-specific metabolism during both in vitro growth and infection revealed consistent patterns of metabolism which corre- sponded with experimentally measured increases in virulence factor expression. Our results support that differential C. difficile virulence is associated with distinct meta- bolic programs related to use of carbon sources and provide a platform for identifi- cation of novel therapeutic targets. 

KEYWORDS Clostridioides difficile, metabolic modeling, transcriptomics, virulence factors